Hello and welcome.
Today we're going to take a look
at the phenomenon of
electrostatic discharge, or ESD,
and how it affects integrated
circuits.
Electrostatic discharge is just
one of an entire range of
phenomena that come under the
heading of electromagnetic
compatibility, or EMC for short.
Now, Simply put, the study of EMC
concerns itself with how an
electronic device responds to
electromagnetic disturbances and
how an electronic device might
disturb other devices through its
own electromagnetic emissions.
Most frequently we study how a
device responds to radiated
energy and conducted energy over
a range of frequencies and how
much energy a device radiates as
radio waves and launches on
attached conductors.
Frequently we look at a specific
type of conducted energy known as
electrical fast transient or EFT,
and that's a particularly
difficult kind of conducted
interference that's caused by
some fluorescent lamp fixtures
and other electrical equipment.
Modern microcontroller based
devices have to be able to
tolerate this kind of
interference without damage and
without resetting.
But today we're going to be
looking at another sticky form of
electromagnetic interference,
electrostatic discharge.
Now, to begin with, let's have a
look at what ESD actually is.
The most obvious and the most
spectacular example of
electrostatic discharge is
lightning.
In many parts of the world, some
seasons bring thunderstorms, and
those storms frequently present
us with beautiful displays of the
awesome power of lightning.
Lightning results when friction
between ascending and descending
atmospheric currents in a storm
cloud 'cause electric charges to
segregate into different areas.
Now, as these charges accumulate,
the likelihood of an
electrostatic discharge
increases.
And when the discharge occurs,
you get the phenomena you
normally associate with
lightning, a bright flash of
light as the electron flow
ionizes and heats the air into
incandescents, and the sound of
Thunder as the Super heated air
explosively expands.
Now let's think about lightning a
little more closely.
You have a segregation of charges
of opposite polarity and an
insulating dielectric layer the
air.
When the charge potential becomes
too great, the air dielectric
breaks down and the air is
ionized.
That is, the electrons are
stripped from the molecules that
make up the air, and the result
is a super heated plasma.
Of course, when the electric
strike is over, the air cools,
the electrons resume their normal
orbits, and all is well.
That is, unless you happen to be
in the vicinity of the lightning
strike.
OK, now let's think smaller.
When the humidity is low, most of
us have had the experience of
walking across a carpet, reaching
for a door knob and ZAP boy, that
really hurts.
The same thing has happened.
A charge difference between the
door knob and your body, which by
the way is actually quite
conductive, has resulted in an
electrostatic discharge event.
The air was ionized.
A sound was heard as the air
super heated and expanded.
The same kind of thing can happen
to integrated circuits, but there
are a couple of differences.
The dielectric isn't air, it's
silicon dioxide or glass, and the
glass can't repair itself like
the air can.
Let's think about what happens
inside an integrated circuit when
an ESD event occurs.
Well, the first thing there
probably isn't going to be a
spark, and to understand why we
need to think about the structure
of a Moss transistor.
A Moss transistor consists of a
channel that can be either
conducting or non conducting.
The state of the channel is
controlled by a gate electrode
that is electrically isolated
from the channel by a thin layer
of silicon dioxide.
The electric field caused by the
potential of the gate relative to
the potential of the channel
controls the flow of current in
the channel.
All well and good, but to
maximize the influence of the
electric field on the channel,
that gate insulator has to be
thin.
Perhaps as thin as 10 nanometers.
So that's the struggle.
We need to get a gate insulator
as thin as it can be, but also
with as much dielectric strength
as possible.
OK, it's time to break out the
math.
First, think about air.
The dielectric strength of dry
air is about 36,000 volts per
centimeter.
So think about that for a second.
If you draw a half centimeter arc
when your finger approaches a
door knob, you've probably
experienced a potential
difference of close to 20,000
volts.
Great job.
Well, for silicon dioxide, as it
appears in semiconductor
materials, the dielectric
strength is on the order of 10
million volts per centimeter.
Well, that should surely be
enough, one would think.
Well, the problem is that 10
nanometers is 1 millionth of a
centimeter.
That means that the gate can
tolerate at most about 10 volts
before it breaks down, And since
we've already seen that your body
can accumulate over 10,000 volts
of potential, it's easy to see
that you're pretty likely to
cause a dielectric breakdown in
any unprotected gauge just by
routine handling.
Well, I mean, that's OK, right?
Because when the lightning
strike occurs, the air heals
itself.
Doesn't silicon dioxide do the
same thing?
Good try.
But no.
See, here's the thing.
In air, the discharge path leaves
a trail of ionized oxygen and
nitrogen.
Some of the ionized oxygen forms
ozone, giving you that nice after
a shower smell.
And some of the ionized nitrogen
forms oxides of nitrogen.
And that's good for the flowers.
In any case, natural processes
cause the compounds to dissipate
over time, and soon the air
returns to normal, no harm, no
foul.
But in solids, the situation is
quite different.
Electrostatic discharge causes
localized heating that exceeds
the melting point of the
dielectric material, in this case
glass.
This damage can destroy the
functionality of a semiconductor
device in two ways.
1st, for just an instant during
the discharge event, the
conduction path is carrying a
tremendous current.
This current can vaporize the
tiny conductors etched into the
active layers of the chip.
Suddenly, where you had a
conduction path before, you have
none and the device stops
working.
The second failure path is called
punch through.
It's when the gate oxide melts
along with parts of the metal
gate and the molten metal and
glass short the connection
between the gate and the
conduction channel of the Moss
transistor.
Effectively the transistor can no
longer switch and once again the
device stops working.
Now sometimes an ESD event
doesn't actually destroy the
part.
In some cases it can just
diminish the performance of the
device.
If the gate of the transistor is
compromised, the gain may be
reduced or the threshold voltages
might be altered.
Hey, even worse, you might not
see any reduction in the
performance in the near term, but
the device may have less ability
to tolerate another ESD event in
the future.
You won't even know about it
until suddenly, for no apparent
reason, the device just stops
working.
The culprit in all this is
something called the
triboelectric effect.
The prefix tribo comes from a
Greek word that means to rub.
When two dissimilar materials
come into contact, they're likely
to exchange electrons.
Then, when they're separated, one
of the materials is chemically
more likely to retain the
electrons than the other, so that
material becomes negatively
charged.
The other material, the one that
lost the electrons, becomes
positively charged.
This table gives you an idea of
various materials and their
tendency to gain or lose
electrons, but this isn't an
exact science.
The amount of charge transferred
depends a lot on the surface
texture, contamination that may
be present, humidity, and a whole
number of other factors.
The thing to remember is this
static electricity isn't just a
matter of leather shoes on carpet
or running Combs through dry
hair.
Damaging charges can accumulate
on any surface at any time.
And as we've seen, just because
you don't see a spark doesn't
mean you're safe.
So let's get this straight.
Electrostatic discharge at levels
far too low to actually cause a
spark can damage or destroy MOS
transistors, and you can't get
away from static electricity due
to the triboelectric effect
that's all around us.
So what can we do?
Well, as it turns out, there's
actually quite a lot that we can
do.
First, all modern semiconductor
devices, with some rare
exceptions, include structures
that mitigate the risk of
electrostatic discharge.
Now notice that I said mitigate
and not eliminate.
You can still overwhelm the
protection circuitry with enough
electrostatic energy, but these
protection mechanisms are a vast
improvement over exposing an
unprotected mosque to the outside
world.
Now in this diagram we see two
different kinds of protection.
Connected to the IO pin in
addition to the internal
circuitry is a pair of diodes,
one connected to the power supply
rail and the other to ground.
Now since the diodes are reverse
biased, you might initially think
that they have no effect other
than to add a little capacitance
to the input stage.
But in fact, they're critical.
If a voltage surge that exceeds
the supply level is applied to
the IO pin, the upper diode will
begin to conduct, limiting the
voltage to the internal circuitry
to no more than one diode drop
above the supply rail.
Now, similarly, if a surge that
drives the IO pin below ground is
applied, the lower diode begins
to conduct, limiting the voltage
to the internal circuitry to not
more than one diode drop below
ground.
Now, there are other
considerations for these diodes
that we're going to talk about in
just a moment, but for now,
understand that having these
diodes in place goes a long way
toward protecting the sensitive
gate oxide in the internal
circuitry.
But what if the supply pin is the
point that takes the surge?
Well, that's why we have the
power clamp in the circuit.
This device, frequently some
kind of transient voltage
suppressor, works like a bi
directional zener diode,
conducting when the voltage
exceeds some predetermined
level.
And it's often designed to
dissipate a level of energy that
would damage or destroy the
sensitive logic circuits that
make the chip work.
Once again, the power clamp can
be overwhelmed by excessive
energy, but it's a lot better
than leaving the device
completely unprotected.
Now here's a closer look, and it
gives us the opportunity to see
the characteristics we need in
the protection diodes.
Consider what happens when a
surge due to electrostatic
potential comes along.
If the surge is positive relative
to the power rail, the upper of
the two diodes conducts and the
current associated with the surge
flows into the power rail.
But for this to work, the
switching time of the diode has
to be significantly less than the
expected rise time of the ESD
event.
If it's not, the diode will still
be in the off state when the
surge is at the peak of its
destructive potential and the
Moss input will invariably be
damaged.
So that's the first requirement.
The diode has to be fast.
The second requirement is that
the diode has to be robust.
By this I mean that the diode
itself mustn't be damaged or
destroyed by the kind of ESD
events we expect to see.
I mean, if the diode is
destroyed, it can't protect the
input on the chip.
The diode structure might wind up
being quite large compared to
some of the other device
components just to allow it to
handle the expected currents.
Now the last two requirements
really don't have anything to do
with ESD protection, but they do
concern compromising device
operation when there isn't any
ESD event.
You see, many inputs are expected
to operate at high frequencies,
maybe hundreds of megahertz,
perhaps as high as a few
gigahertz.
That means a few peak of areas
of additional capacitance on the
input can have a significant
impact on the device
parametrics.
So for this reason we have to
keep the parasitic capacitance of
the protection diodes as low as
possible.
Finally, we have to recognize
that many electronic components
go into applications.
They're power constrained.
Now I'm thinking about battery
operated components, especially
those that have to operate for
months or years on battery
power.
Minimizing current draw is
crucial and that means the
reverse bias leakage of these
diodes had better be as close to
0 as can be achieved.
So to summarize, these
protection diodes have to be
fast.
They have to act quickly to route
the ESD surge current away from
the internal circuitry.
They have to be robust so that
they can handle the ESD current.
They have to be extremely low
leakage.
Hey, if the diodes are leaky,
they'll impact battery life.
And if that input connects to
analog circuitry, just a little
leakage current can disturb the
accuracy of a low level sensor.
And the diodes have to have a
very low junction capacitance.
Otherwise you've just introduced
a low pass filter into your
circuit.
That's all for today.
Thanks for watching and stay
tuned for more informative
tutorials from ADI.